- [Narrator] This chapter focuses on
the Java EE WebSocket API.
The WebSocket API is used to allow Java applications
to communicate over the WebSocket protocol.
Let's talk a little bit about
that protocol before proceeding.
Highly interactive web applications
have increased the need for two-way communication
between browsers and servers.
These apps need data to be pushed
from the server at will without
the client initiating a request.
The HTTP standard protocol for Internet communications
is inefficient at filling this requirement
and developers started building polling mechanisms
that continuously ping the server
from the browser to potentially retrieve data.
Sometimes there was data,
sometimes there wasn't.
These mechanisms are inefficient,
because many connections are created
and HTTP headers were required to be sent
with every request.
The WebSockets Protocol was developed
to address these needs,
allowing bidirectional, full duplex communication
between the browser and server over TCP.
Under the WebSockets protocol,
a client initiates the connection via HTTP,
and then the connection is upgraded
to the WebSockets protocol.
Once connected, the server or client
can send messages at any time
without the client initiating the communication.
This significantly reduces
the number of connections required.
The WebSockets protocol provides
a better way to architect
highly interactive web application,
and support for the protocol is
provided by Java EE's WebSockets API.
Within the API,
there are two approaches for working with WebSockets.
The simplest approach is the annotation-based approach
where annotations supporting WebSockets are added to POJOs.
The programmatic approach requires
developers to implement certain API interfaces
for working with WebSockets.
These interfaces handle connections,
message sending, and consumption.
Additionally, this approach requires
some configuration classes to be created.
It's a little bit more heavy weight than
the annotation-based approach.
We'll primarily be working with annotations
throughout this chapter,
and we'll use them to create WebSockets
very easily and in a simplistic manner.
In WebSockets, the connection is established
between two peers who exchange messages bidirectionally.
The Java EE API refers to the peer
initiating the connection as the ClientEndpoint.
An endpoint simply represents one side of the connection.
The ServerEndpoint accepts the connection
and then the two peers exchange messages over a session
until one peer ends the connection.
It's also important to understand
that multiple peers may be connected
to the ServerEndpoint.
This allows the ServerEndpoint to broadcast messages
to a group of peers simultaneously.
When working with the Java WebSockets API,
it is likely that you will be primarily
working with ServerEndpoint,
because the primary client is typically a web browser.
Let's take a quick look at the annotations
used to build WebSockets endpoints.
The ServerEndpoint annotation
is placed at the class level to create an endpoint.
When the application is deployed,
this class is then made available
at the path specified in the annotation.
The next four annotations that begin with on
provide hooks into the different events
in the endpoint's life cycle.
They are annotated to a method
to be invoked when a particular event occurs,
sort of like a listener.
These annotations provide hooks for
when a Socket session is opened,
we receive a message,
or an error occurs,
or the session is closed.
Let's put this information to use
as we get hands-on with some examples.